NARRATOR: THE GLOBALIZATION
OF THE WORLD'S ECONOMY
HAS BROUGHT WITH IT
THE LARGEST MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE
IN THE HISTORY
OF MODERN TIMES.
EVERYWHERE,
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
ARE ON THEIR WAY
TO SOMEWHERE NEW.
NO WALL OR BARRIER IS
STRONG ENOUGH TO STOP MIGRANTS
AS THEY CROSS
INTERNATIONAL BORDERS,
ON A JOURNEY
TO WHERE THE ACTION IS--
THE GLOBAL CITIES.
[BAND PLAYING
THE DOORS' "BREAK ON THROUGH"]
NARRATOR: TOKYO IS A GLOBAL
CITY OF POWER AND FRENZY.
* BREAK ON THROUGH
TO THE OTHER SIDE...
NARRATOR:
TOKYO BUZZES WITH ENERGY.
TRAINS RUMBLE
THROUGH THE NIGHT.
* OH, YEAH!
DOWN EVERY STREET,
HUGE CROWDS FIGHT FOR SPACE,
WITH CARS
RUSHING BY AT ALL HOURS.
EVEN THOUGH TOKYO
OUTWARDLY SEEMS WESTERNIZED,
UNLIKE WESTERN
GLOBAL CITIES, TOKYO REMAINS
A CITY WITHOUT
A VISIBLE FOREIGN POPULATION.
JONATHAN WATTS: IF YOU LOOK
AT THE COUNTRY AS A WHOLE,
I THINK IT'S ONE PERCENT,
OR MAYBE EVEN LESS THAN
ONE PERCENT
OF THE POPULATION
ARE NON-JAPANESE.
SO YOU'VE GOT THIS INCREDIBLY
HOMOGENOUS NATION.
AND I THINK THAT'S DEFINITELY
A RESULT OF GOVERNMENT POLICY--
VERY, VERY TIGHT
IMMIGRATION RULES.
NARRATOR: PERHAPS
THE MOST VISIBLE
FOREIGN PRESENCE IN TOKYO
ARE THE THOUSANDS OF WOMEN
WHO COME
FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD
TO PROVIDE ENTERTAINMENT
TO JAPANESE MEN.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED
TO DISCOURAGE THIS TRADE,
NOT WITH PROHIBITION,
BUT WITH REGULATIONS.
ONE SUCH REGULATION STATES
THAT EACH FOREIGN ENTERTAINER
MUST PASS A TEST
OF DANCING SKILLS
SHE WILL HARDLY NEED.
IMMIGRATION HAS NOT SO FAR
CAUSED AS MUCH CONCERN IN JAPAN
AS IN OTHER
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
HOWEVER, IT'S ONLY
A MATTER OF TIME
BEFORE JAPAN IS FACED WITH
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL STRAINS
OVER THE ISSUE OF IMMIGRATION.
HISTORICALLY, JAPAN
HASN'T DEALT WITH IMMIGRATION,
HASN'T BROUGHT IN
LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE.
AND A LOT OF JAPANESE
HAVEN'T HAD CONTACT
WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD
AND WITH OTHER PEOPLE.
AND SO IT MAY NOT BE
THE EASIEST PLACE
FOR FOREIGNERS TO COME.
[MAN TRANSLATING RYO ONOYAMA]
JAPAN IS NOT YET READY
TO ACCEPT OUTSIDERS.
WE'RE STILL A CLOSED COUNTRY.
WE STILL HAVE
NOTIONS OF RACIAL PURITY.
THIS IS WHY I DO THINK
JAPANESE SOCIETY IS RACIST.
HERE IN TOKYO, THERE'S RACISM
IN EVERYDAY LIFE,
AND STRONG FEELINGS
OF REJECTION TOWARD FOREIGNERS.
FOR INSTANCE,
THERE ARE MANY CASES
OF FOREIGNERS
BEING DENIED ENTRANCE
TO PUBLIC BATHS
AND RESTAURANTS.
I THINK
THE REASON IS RACISM.
I THINK THAT JAPAN BELIEVES
THAT THE BEST WAY FOR IT TO HAVE
A SOCIALLY STABLE COUNTRY
IS TO HAVE A COUNTRY
WITH AS FEW
FOREIGN IMMIGRANTS AS POSSIBLE.
[MAN TRANSLATING ONOYAMA] IN
ANOTHER CASE OF BLATANT RACISM,
TWO BRAZILIAN IMMIGRANTS
WERE MURDERED BY A YOUTH GANG,
SIMPLY BECAUSE THESE JAPANESE
YOUNGSTERS BELIEVED
BRAZILIANS DON'T BELONG HERE,
AND SHOULD GO BACK HOME.
NARRATOR:
ACCORDING TO A RECENT POLL,
ABOUT 80% OF JAPANESE
ARE AGAINST
ACCEPTING MORE FOREIGNERS.
BUT JAPAN'S
RAPIDLY AGEING SOCIETY
AND RECORD LOW BIRTHRATE
ARE FORCING JAPANESE TO RECKON
WITH AN INDISPUTABLE FACT--
THAT THEIR COUNTRY MUST ACCEPT
MORE IMMIGRANTS
INTO ITS WORKFORCE.
KANAK: YEAH, I DON'T THINK
IT'S GONNA BE A GREAT INFLUX.
I DON'T THINK
YOU'RE GONNA SEE THEM
FLING THE DOORS OPEN
TO IMMIGRATION.
BUT I THINK YOU'RE GONNA SEE
A STEADY, STEADY INCREASE.
[TELEPHONE RINGING]
HARALD EISENACH:
ALL OUR STAFF HERE IN JAPAN--
WE CERTAINLY STILL HAVE
THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE
JAPANESE, BEING JAPANESE.
WE HAVE 80%,
81% OF OUR STAFF,
WHICH IS ROUGHLY
1,400 PEOPLE, AS JAPANESE.
BUT THE REMAINING 20 PERCENT
CONSISTS ALL
OF 29 DIFFERENT NATIONALITIES.
LATONYA STANDIFER: WHEN I WENT
TO IMMIGRATION AND ASKED
FOR MY PAPERWORK
IN ORDER TO GET A WORKING VISA,
I WAS VERY CONFIDENT.
FIRST, YOU GOTTA
COME AT 'EM VERY CONFIDENT,
KNOWING WHAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT, YOU KNOW.
IT'S JUST FORMS TO BEGIN WITH.
NARRATOR: JAPAN
IS TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO OPEN
ITS LABOR MARKET TO FOREIGNERS,
WITHOUT APPEARING TO DO SO.
ELABORATE LICENSING SYSTEMS,
SUPPOSEDLY
TO REGULATE IMMIGRATION,
ARE ACTUALLY DESIGNED
TO DISCOURAGE IMMIGRATION.
[MAN TRANSLATING OIKAWA]
17 OF THE 27 TYPES OF VISAS
ARE OPEN TO FOREIGN NATIONALS
COMING HERE TO WORK.
TO WORK IN TOKYO, YOU NEED
TO HAVE A VISA TO ENTER JAPAN,
A CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY,
WHICH DEMONSTRATES
THAT YOU HAVE SPECIAL SKILLS,
AND A LOCAL SPONSOR
WITH A FIRM JOB OFFER.
WELL, FIRST OF ALL,
WHILE YOU'RE HERE,
YOU HAVE TO GET
YOUR PICTURES, YOUR PORTFOLIOS,
YOUR DEMOS TOGETHER.
YOU HAVE
TO BUILD UP SOMETHING FIRST,
BEFORE YOU CAN EVEN
GET THE VISA.
PEOPLE WILL ALWAYS HIRE
A JAPANESE PERSON FIRST CHOICE,
SOMEONE WHO'S BILINGUAL,
BICULTURAL,
RATHER THAN SHIPPING
SOMEBODY IN FROM OVERSEAS.
BICULTURAL MEANS
YOU CAN DO BUSINESS
BOTH IN A WESTERN WAY,
AND A JAPANESE WAY,
SO YOU CAN FOLLOW
THE JAPANESE
WAY OF DOING BUSINESS,
WHICH IS TIME-CONSUMING.
THERE'S A LOT OF FORMALITIES
YOU HAVE TO FOLLOW,
WHEREAS THE WESTERN WAY,
WE SORT OF--
OUR DECISION MAKING'S
VERY QUICK.
JULIET ROWAN:
LIKE IN MY OFFICE,
THEY DON'T LIKE IT
WHEN WE HAVE IDEAS
ABOUT PERHAPS
HOW TO CHANGE SOMETHING,
BECAUSE WE'RE ENCROACHING
ON THEIR TURF,
AND PUTTING OUR SET OF VALUES
ONTO THEM. AND I UNDERSTAND.
SO THAT CAN BE
REALLY FRUSTRATING,
BECAUSE THAT'S
THE COMPLETE OPPOSITE OF OUR--
MY WESTERN UPBRINGING,
OR IDEALS.
AND SO, FOR ME, THAT'S THE
SINGLE MOST FRUSTRATING THING.
YOU NEVER FEEL LIKE YOU'RE GIVEN
ENOUGH CHANCE TO GO PLACES.
[ROCK MUSIC PLAYING]
RICHARD AGUEBOR:
I'VE BEEN LIVING HERE
FOR ABOUT TEN YEARS.
I'M GETTING USED TO
THE JAPANESE WAYS OF THINKING,
I'M GETTING
USED TO THE TRADITION,
THE JAPANESE CULTURE.
THEY HAVE A SYSTEM, YOU KNOW,
A SYSTEM THAT, A PROGRAM SYSTEM,
LIKE, THEY HAVE
A PARTICULAR BELIEF, YOU KNOW.
THEY BELIEVE IN SETTING WAYS,
"THIS IS HOW IT OUGHT TO BE."
AND EVERYBODY SEEMS TO BE
MOVING ALONG THAT DIRECTION.
CHIHARU KAWAI:
I LIVED IN THE STATES
FOR MORE THAN EIGHT YEARS,
EIGHT CONSECUTIVE YEARS,
AND IT WAS VERY DIFFICULT
FOR ME TO ADJUST MYSELF
BACK TO MY OWN SOCIETY.
AND, OF COURSE, YOU KNOW,
TO BE VERY HONEST,
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT FOR A PERSON
LIKE ME TO READJUST MYSELF,
IN JAPANESE BUSINESS WORLD,
BECAUSE THE VALUES
ARE DIFFERENT.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING NOMURA]
I BELIEVE THERE ARE PROFOUND
PHILOSOPHICAL DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN THE WEST AND THE EAST,
AND THIS IS WHY WE HAVE
DIFFERENT VALUE SYSTEMS.
ACCORDING
TO WESTERN PHILOSOPHY,
THE ROLE OF NATURE
IS TO SATISFY HUMAN NEEDS,
WHILE IN EASTERN PHILOSOPHY,
NATURE AND HUMAN BEINGS
CAN COEXIST IN HARMONY,
AND AS A RESULT
OF THIS DIFFERENCE,
WESTERN AND EASTERN THINKING
ARE COMPLETELY DIFFERENT.
NARRATOR:
JAPANESE INTELLECTUALS
AND CORPORATE EXECUTIVES
OFTEN SPEAK OF A JAPANESE MODEL
DIFFERENT FROM
THE IDEOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF WESTERN CAPITALISM.
BUT GLOBALIZATION IS PRODUCING
A RAPID AWAKENING TO THE FACT
THAT GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT
AND INTERDEPENDENCY
ARE A FACT OF LIFE.
THEY'RE NOT SOMETHING JAPAN CAN
CHOOSE TO BE FOR OR AGAINST.
EISENACH:
THE JAPANESE SOCIETY,
ALSO CERTAINLY THE INDUSTRY,
NEEDS TO ADJUST
TO GLOBAL COMPETITION.
AND THAT ONLY ALLOWS
TO A CERTAIN EXTENT,
UP TO A CERTAIN LEVEL,
TO MAINTAIN THEIR OWN WAYS.
BUT BIG COMPANIES
COMPETE GLOBALLY.
THAT CHANGE IS NECESSARY.
IT'S ALREADY HAPPENING.
YOU MENTIONED THAT
YOU HAD ALREADY INTERVIEWED
WITH THE PRESIDENT OF NISSAN,
WHO IS CLEARLY A NON-JAPANESE,
AND IS RUNNING
THE THIRD-LARGEST
CAR MANUFACTURER IN JAPAN.
CORPORATE JAPAN HAS BEEN
EXTREMELY DISCREET
AT THE BEGINNING, VERY DISCREET.
THE PUBLIC WAS VERY CURIOUS.
WELL, I STARTED TO FEEL
SOME KIND OF DOUBT,
OR SKEPTICISM,
AND EVEN SOME CRITICISM,
ABOUT CHALLENGING SOME
TRADITIONAL WAY OF DOING THINGS
IN JAPAN.
IT NEVER WENT VERY FAR.
BUT IT EXISTED IN THE MEDIA,
AND IN, TOO, SOME COMMENTS
MADE BY CEO OF OTHER COMPANIES.
[MAN TRANSLATING NASHIMOTO]
HONDA HAS ALWAYS DONE THINGS
ITS OWN WAY, AND, UNLIKE
OTHER JAPANESE COMPANIES
LIKE NISSAN, FOR EXAMPLE,
WE WOULD NEVER LOOK
FOR OUTSIDERS TO HELP US OUT.
HONDA WOULD NEVER DO THIS.
WE WILL ALWAYS GO OUR OWN WAY.
NARRATOR: CORPORATE JAPAN
REPRESENTS THE RIGIDITY
OF BUSINESS LIFE IN JAPAN,
AN ENVIRONMENT WHERE PEOPLE ARE
EXPECTED TO FIT INTO A MOLD,
AND WHERE EVERYBODY MUST
FIT PERFECTLY INTO THE SPACE
ASSIGNED TO HIM OR HER
BY THE CORPORATION.
BUT NOW, IN TOKYO,
THE NEW GENERATION
IS EAGER TO TAKE ITS CHANCES
OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE FOLD.
[MAN TRANSLATING TAKANIRO]
MY FATHER WORKS FOR A BIG
CORPORATION, BUT I DON'T WANT
TO CLIMB THE CORPORATE LADDER,
BECAUSE THERE'S ALWAYS A LIMIT
ON HOW HIGH YOU CAN GO.
I DON'T WANT A LIFE LIKE THAT.
I WANT TO BE MYSELF,
AND NOT JUST A NUMBER
IN A BIG CORPORATION.
THAT'S WHY I'M A MUSICIAN.
KANAK: THE YOUNG PEOPLE
AREN'T CHARGING IN
TO HAVING
THESE LIFETIME CAREERS
IN MAJOR ORGANIZATIONS
UNTHINKINGLY.
THEY'RE THINKING ABOUT
WHERE THEY WANT TO WORK.
AND THERE'S A LOT
OF YOUNG PEOPLE TODAY
THAT ARE LOOKING TO BE FREE.
THEY WANT TO DO PART-TIME JOBS,
THEY WANT
TO BE ABLE TO MOVE AROUND.
I THINK
THAT'S A FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE.
[MAN TRANSLATING]
I WOULD LIKE TO BE MYSELF
AND DO WHAT I REALLY WANT,
BUT JAPANESE SOCIETY
DOESN'T ALLOW ME.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING]
I DON'T DRESS LIKE THIS
TO SEND
PROTEST MESSAGES TO PEOPLE.
I JUST LIKE IT, SO I DO IT.
[MAN TRANSLATING]
IN TOKYO, YOU HAVE THE FREEDOM
TO BE WHATEVER YOU WANT TO BE.
AND I AM.
NARRATOR: "YOUNG JAPANESE
THINK THEY CAN BE ANYTHING,"
SAYS YU MIRI. "THEY THINK
FREEDOM IS SOMETHING SIMPLE,
"BUT THEY DON'T UNDERSTAND
WHAT THAT WORD REALLY MEANS."
[SPEAKING JAPANESE]
NARRATOR:
YU MIRI IS ONE OF JAPAN'S
MOST POPULAR WRITERS.
HER NOVELS HAVE ATTRACTED
A PASSIONATE FOLLOWING,
ESPECIALLY AMONG YOUNG WOMEN.
YU MIRI'S BREAKTHROUGH
CAME IN 1999, WHEN HER BOOK,
"KAZUKU CINEMA (FAMILY CINEMA)"
WON THE AKUTAWA PRIZE,
ONE OF JAPAN'S MOST PRESTIGIOUS
LITERARY AWARDS.
BEYOND THE ATTENTION
HER BOOKS RECEIVED,
SHE BECAME A CELEBRITY
AS A FOCUS OF RACIST RAGE.
RIGHT-WINGERS THREATENED
TO BURN BOOKSTORES,
AND MANY EVENTS
HAD TO BE CANCELLED.
OF KOREAN DESCENT,
YU MIRI'S STORY
PERSONIFIES THE MISTREATMENT
OF JAPAN'S LARGEST MINORITY.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING MIRI]
AS A SECOND-GENERATION
KOREAN JAPANESE, I HAVE
PROBLEMS AT HOME AND AT SCHOOL.
AT HOME, I COULD NOT
UNDERSTAND KOREAN,
AND I DIDN'T WANT TO LEARN IT.
THIS MADE
MY KOREAN PARENTS ANGRY.
AT SCHOOL, I WAS ABUSED
BECAUSE, AS A KOREAN,
MY CLASSMATES AND TEACHERS
CONSIDERED ME INFERIOR.
NARRATOR: THE LARGEST
INFLUX OF FOREIGNERS
IN JAPAN'S HISTORY
WAS THE ARRIVAL
OF THOUSANDS OF KOREANS,
FORCIBLY BROUGHT TO JAPAN
TO WORK OR FIGHT ON ITS BEHALF
IN THE LATE 1930s,
RIGHT BEFORE WORLD WAR II.
TODAY, ALMOST HALF A MILLION
KOREANS LIVE IN TOKYO,
AND AFTER SEVERAL GENERATIONS,
THEY'RE STILL CLASSIFIED
AS FOREIGNERS.
WATTS: THE WAY IT CHARACTERIZES
"JAPANESENESS"
IS NOT ABOUT WHO'S BORN HERE.
IT'S ABOUT HAVING BLOOD
THAT STRETCHES BACK
OVER A CERTAIN PERIOD OF TIME.
WHEREAS,
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE U.K.,
YOUR NATIONALITY'S DETERMINED
BY WHERE YOU WERE BORN,
WHEREAS IN JAPAN,
YOUR NATIONALITY IS DETERMINED
BY WHO
YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER WAS.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING LEE]
I HAVEN'T CONFRONTED
DISCRIMINATION DIRECTLY,
BUT I THINK THE REASON IS
THAT I MARRIED A EUROPEAN MAN,
A GERMAN, AND I SPEAK GERMAN,
SO PEOPLE HERE IN TOKYO SEE ME
AS HALF ASIAN AND HALF GERMAN,
AND THEY TREAT ME DIFFERENTLY
THAN OTHER ASIANS.
BUT OTHER KOREANS
FACE DISCRIMINATION EVERY DAY,
ESPECIALLY
IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
AND EVEN WHEN
THEY CHANGE THEIR KOREAN NAMES
TO A JAPANESE NAME,
AND WANT TO PASS AS JAPANESE,
PEOPLE OF KOREAN DESCENT
ARE STILL CONSIDERED OUTSIDERS.
NARRATOR: THIRD AND FOURTH
GENERATION KOREAN JAPANESE,
WHO PASS AS JAPANESE,
YET ARE DENIED CITIZENSHIP,
MAINTAIN THAT IN TOKYO,
BLOOD ALONE DEFINES IDENTITY.
MORE RECENT NEWCOMERS, HOWEVER,
FEEL WELL-INTEGRATED
IN JAPANESE SOCIETY,
AND BELIEVE THAT SHARED VALUES
AND MUTUAL SELF-INTEREST
ARE BEGINNING
TO DEFINE JAPANESE IDENTITY.
[SOFT ROCK SINGING]
AGUEBOR: THESE PEOPLE,
THEY REALLY ARE SET PEOPLE.
THEY ARE SET HERE.
THEY TAKE YOU, YOU BECOME
PART AND PARCEL OF THEM,
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU'RE GETTING
MORE INVOLVED WITH THEM,
WHEN YOU COME
TO UNDERSTAND THEIR WAYS.
SO YOU ARE FULLY ACCEPTED.
THEY TAKE YOU AS ONE OF THEM.
IT'S NOT AS DISCRIMINATORY
AS MOST PEOPLE THINK.
IT'S NOT AT ALL.
THEY HAVE ACCEPTED ME.
AND I THINK IF THEY CAN
ACCEPT ME AS A BLACK MAN,
THEY CAN ACCEPT ANY OTHER
PERSON, ALL OVER THE WORLD.
BLACK FRIENDS I'VE HAD,
WHO'VE COME FROM THE U.K.,
OR COME FROM THE U.S.,
HAVE EXPERIENCED
A DIFFERENT JAPAN.
ONE CANADIAN GUY I KNEW
WHO'S A BLACK GUY,
HE WANTED
TO FIND ACCOMMODATION,
AND HE ORGANIZED EVERYTHING
OVER THE TELEPHONE,
AND HAD IT ALL SET UP,
IT WAS AGREED HE'D MOVE IN.
AND THEN WHEN HE ARRIVED
AND THEY SAW HE WAS BLACK,
RATHER THAN HEARING
JUST A CANADIAN VOICE,
HE WAS-- SUDDENLY
THAT FLAT WAS NOT AVAILABLE.
[MAN TRANSLATING KAMPPETER]
AS A EUROPEAN, A GERMAN,
I SENSE THAT I'M ACCEPTED
A LITTLE BIT MORE
THAN OTHER FOREIGNERS.
BUT JAPANESE PEOPLE STILL DON'T
WANT TO GET TOO CLOSE TO ME.
THEY KEEP THEIR DISTANCE.
AS FAR AS RELATING
WITH THE JAPANESE PEOPLE,
I HAVEN'T HAD SO MANY PROBLEMS.
SOMETIMES I THINK
THEY'RE A LITTLE SCARED OF ME,
BECAUSE I'M A BIT LOUD
COMPARED TO THEM, BUT...
[LAUGHS]
MOST OF THE TIME, IT'S OK.
NARRATOR: THE JAPANESE
ARE DEEPLY PRIVATE PEOPLE.
THEY LIVE IN
A PROTOCOL-CONSTRICTED SOCIETY
WHERE VENTURING
ONE'S OPINION, TOO FORCIBLY,
OR EVEN OUT OF TURN,
IS FROWNED UPON.
THESE ARE
HIGHLY CIVILIZED PEOPLE,
MEMBERS OF A SOCIETY
SO ORDERED AS TO SEEM ALIEN.
TOKYO IS UNQUESTIONABLY
A MODERN CITY,
BUT CERTAIN TRADITIONAL CUSTOMS
HAVE NOT CHANGED FOR CENTURIES.
[CHANTING IN JAPANESE]
[MAN TRANSLATING OKUYAMA]
I HELP SICK PEOPLE
WHO ARE SUFFERING FROM PHYSICAL
OR EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS.
MANY OF MY PATIENTS
HAVE GONE TO REGULAR DOCTORS,
BUT THEY HAVE NOT
GOTTEN BETTER,
BECAUSE MOST OF THEIR PROBLEMS
ARE CAUSED BY THE SPIRITS,
WHICH LIVE INSIDE
OUR MINDS AND BODIES,
AND DOCTORS DON'T KNOW
HOW TO DEAL WITH THE SPIRITS.
NARRATOR:
JAPANESE ZEN BUDDHISM
BELIEVES IN THE GREAT,
LIBERATING SPIRIT,
A SPIRITUAL FORCE
WHICH CAN HELP BELIEVERS
LIBERATE THEMSELVES
FROM THE DOMINANCE OF GREED,
AND FROM THE SHACKLES
OF ILLUSIONS.
TO MANY OUTSIDERS,
TOKYO PRESENTS THE IMAGE
OF A CITY TOO HAMSTRUNG
BY ITS OWN CULTURAL TRADITIONS
TO FULLY EMBRACE
GLOBALIZATION.
YET THE AVERAGE TOKYOITE
GETS A BIG KICK OUT OF GOING
TO AN AMERICAN-STYLE
BASEBALL GAME,
JAPAN'S NATIONAL SPORT,
AND THEN HAVING A FAST MEAL
AT ONE OF THE
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN STORES
INSIDE THE TOKYO DOME.
KANAK:
IT'S NOT SURPRISING
THAT THERE'S
A LOT OF AMERICAN ASPECT
TO CERTAIN THINGS
THAT GO ON IN JAPAN, I THINK.
I MEAN, THE TWO COUNTRIES
HAVE FORMED SO MANY BONDS
OVER SUCH
A LONG PERIOD OF TIME.
NARRATOR: AND FEW
AMERICAN-JAPANESE BONDS
ARE AS STRONG
AS McDONALD'S HAMBURGERS.
THE FIRST STORE
OPENED IN TOKYO IN 1971.
TODAY, OVER 300 STORES
ARE OPERATING IN TOKYO,
AND McDONALD'S JAPAN
HAS ANNUAL SALES
OF $3.4 BILLION, SECOND ONLY
TO THE UNITED STATES.
[MAN TRANSLATING KENJI KANIYA]
JAPANESE LIKE THE TASTE
OF KETCHUP, BUT THEY ALSO LIKE
SOY SAUCE AND GINGER TASTES,
SO McDONALD'S TRIES
TO OFFER ITS CUSTOMERS
ALL OF THESE FLAVORS.
THAT'S WHY WE'VE INTRODUCED
PRODUCTS UNIQUE TO JAPAN,
LIKE OUR CHICKEN TASTA,
AND OUR TERIYAKI BURGERS.
McDONALD'S IS FULLY OPERATED
BY JAPANESE STAFF,
BECAUSE THESE ARE PEOPLE
WHO UNDERSTAND AND RELATE
TO THE CULTURE OF THE CUSTOMERS
THAT THEY'RE SERVING.
AND FOR US,
THIS IS VERY IMPORTANT.
NARRATOR:
AT McDONALD'S JAPAN,
MEETING THE DEMANDS
OF LOCAL CULTURE
MEANS ADOPTING JAPANESE
MARKETING STRATEGIES.
IN TOKYO, FOR INSTANCE,
McDONALD'S IS CALLED
"MAKUDONARUDO,"
A SOUND THAT IS MORE PLEASANT
TO JAPANESE EARS.
CHANGE, AMID NO CHANGE,
IS AN OLD JAPANESE STORY.
SO IS ACCOMMODATING
TO THINGS FOREIGN.
LET THE FOREIGNERS IN,
SO AS TO KEEP THEM OUT,
IS THE PRINCIPLE.
ACCEPT
THOSE PRACTICES FROM ABROAD
THAT DO NOT
THREATEN THE FUNDAMENTALS.
ROWAN: YOU ALWAYS
REMAIN AN OUTSIDER.
I HATE TO SAY IT,
BUT YOU DO, BECAUSE...
BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT JAPANESE,
FOR THAT SIMPLE REASON.
SO, FOR THAT REASON,
I DON'T THINK
I WANT TO SPEND
MY WHOLE LIFE HERE,
BECAUSE I DON'T FEEL
LIKE I COULD BE
INTEGRATED ENOUGH
INTO THE SOCIETY
TO WANT TO STAY HERE FOREVER.
I DON'T FEEL
CLOSE ENOUGH TO PEOPLE.
I FIND IT VERY, VERY EASY.
BUT THAT IS PERHAPS BECAUSE
I HAVEN'T TRIED TO BE JAPANESE.
I LIVE AS A...
I LIVE AS A FOREIGNER, AND I...
I HAVE A JAPANESE WIFE,
AND WE HAVE TWO KIDS,
WHO ARE OBVIOUSLY
HALF AND HALF.
WE HAVEN'T EXPERIENCED
ANY REAL PROBLEMS.
[AMERICAN ROCK MUSIC PLAYING]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING LEE] I WOULD
SAY THAT A MIXED MARRIAGE,
AN INTERNATIONAL MARRIAGE,
MAKES LIFE MORE INTERESTING,
AND IT'S
AN ENRICHING EXPERIENCE.
BUT IT'S NOT ALWAYS EASY
TO LIVE IN A MIXED MARRIAGE,
BECAUSE YOU HAVE
TWO DIFFERENT CULTURES,
EITHER COMING TOGETHER,
OR CLASHING WITH EACH OTHER.
[MAN TRANSLATING KAMPPETER]
IN TOKYO, A FEW YEARS AGO,
IT WAS DIFFICULT
TO BE IN A MIXED MARRIAGE,
BUT NOW THERE'S NO PROBLEM
FOR JAPANESE AND EUROPEAN
COUPLES. IT'S ACCEPTED.
BUT MIXED MARRIAGES BETWEEN
JAPANESE AND NON-EUROPEANS
ARE NOT YET ACCEPTED.
[LATIN SALSA MUSIC PLAYING]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING ISHIGAWA]
MY PARENTS OPPOSED MY MARRIAGE,
NOT BECAUSE MY FIANCE
WAS A LATINO,
BUT BECAUSE,
LIKE MOST JAPANESE PARENTS,
THEY DON'T WANT THEIR CHILDREN
TO MARRY FOREIGNERS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING KUBO]
I THINK IT WAS EASY FOR ME
TO MARRY YOKO,
BECAUSE SHE SPEAKS SPANISH.
I'M SURE IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
MORE DIFFICULT
TO MARRY A WOMAN
WHO SPEAKS ONLY JAPANESE.
WE BOTH ALSO LOVE
TO DANCE SALSA. THAT HELPED.
BUT WE STILL HAVE
LOTS OF PROBLEMS.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING ISHIGAWA]
WHAT I DISCOVERED
IN MY MARRIAGE
IS THAT LOVEMAKING
IS THE SAME, NO MATTER
WHERE YOU COME FROM.
LATINO OR JAPANESE,
IT'S ALL THE SAME.
IT ALL DEPENDS ON THE LOVER.
[MAN TRANSLATING KUBO]
WHEN A JAPANESE WOMAN
ENTERS THE SALSA WORLD,
HER PERSONALITY CHANGES.
SHE MEETS LOTS OF LATINOS,
AND QUICKLY SHE LEARNS
HOW TO DEAL WITH THEM,
WHAT TO DO
AND WHAT NOT TO DO, YOU KNOW?
BUT EVEN WHEN A JAPANESE WOMAN
LOVES SALSA AND SPEAKS SPANISH,
IT'S NOT EASY.
THERE ARE BIG DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN BEING LATINO
AND BEING JAPANESE.
BIG DIFFERENCES.
I CAN TEACH THE JAPANESE
TO DANCE SALSA,
BUT I CANNOT TEACH THEM
THE FEELING THAT YOU NEED
TO DANCE WELL.
THAT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO TEACH.
IT COMES OUT NATURALLY.
AND THE JAPANESE HAVE PROBLEMS
EXPRESSING FEELING.
THEY DO IT,
THEY DO EXPRESS FEELING.
BUT IT'S DIFFERENT.
IT'S THEIR OWN KIND OF FEELING.
[SALSA MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR:
DESPITE THE MANY PROBLEMS
FACED BY
FOREIGNERS LIVING IN TOKYO,
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD
ARE COMING TO TOKYO,
LOOKING FOR ADVENTURE,
OR NEW OPPORTUNITIES.
KRUMPLITSCH: TO A YOUNG WOMAN
WANTING TO MOVE TO TOKYO,
I WOULD SAY,
GO FOR IT. DON'T BE SCARED.
IT'S A GREAT COUNTRY
TO LIVE IN,
ESPECIALLY
AS A YOUNG WOMAN HERE.
IT'S VERY SAFE.
I CAN WALK AROUND ANYWHERE,
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT,
AND NOT FEEL LIKE I'M GONNA
GET ATTACKED, OR ANYTHING.
NARRATOR: PERHAPS
THE MOST SHOCKING ASPECT
OF EVERYDAY LIFE IN TOKYO
FOR NEWCOMERS ARE THE CROWDS.
WHEREVER YOU GO IN THE CITY,
YOU'RE CONFRONTED
BY HUGE WAVES OF PEOPLE.
ROWAN:
WHEN I FIRST ARRIVED IN JAPAN,
I USED TO GET REALLY
FREAKED OUT ABOUT PEOPLE.
I FELT LIKE THEY WERE
INVADING MY PERSONAL SPACE.
I ALWAYS FELT
LIKE THERE'S SOMEONE
ABOUT TO STAB ME IN THE BACK,
OR DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT,
BECAUSE THEY'RE JUST
SO CLOSE TO ME,
OR STEAL MY PURSE.
BUT THEN I REALIZED
THAT THEIR PERSONAL SPACE
IS JUST
A LOT SMALLER THAN OURS,
AND AFTER A WHILE,
YOU BECOME REALLY USED TO THAT,
AND YOU CAN BE
MUCH MORE INTIMATE WITH PEOPLE.
KAWAI: NOW, YOU CAN FIND
ALMOST ANYTHING,
ANYTHING YOU WANT,
IN THIS CITY.
SO IN THAT SENSE,
I LIKE TOKYO VERY MUCH,
AND I ENJOY IT. BUT...
STILL, I DON'T FEEL COMPLETELY
COMFORTABLE OVER HERE,
BECAUSE OF THE JAPANESE,
TRADITIONAL
JAPANESE VALUES ARE--
BECAUSE TRADITIONAL JAPANESE
VALUESARE SO PERSISTENT.
GHOSN: WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO GO THROUGH
A PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENTS
IN MANY COUNTRIES,
WHERE, FINALLY,
THERE HAVE, THERE WILL BE
A HIGH LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS
ABOUT, WHAT IS YOUR IDENTITY?
WHAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT,
AND DO YOU WANT TO KEEP IT?
BUT AT THE SAME TIME,
THERE IS NO DOUBT:
GLOBALIZATION IS NOT AN OPTION,
IT IS A DIRECTION, IT'S A TREND
WHICH IS HERE TO STAY.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE AGENDA
OF JAPANESE
BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS,
AND LOOK AT THE AMERICAN
CHAMBER'S AGENDA HERE,
THEY'VE BEGUN TO CONVERGE.
THEY'RE BOTH
LOOKING FOR A SOCIETY
WHICH IS MORE DEREGULATED,
WHICH ENCOURAGES
PRIVATE SOLUTIONS,
NOT NECESSARILY PUBLIC
SOLUTIONS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS,
LOOKS FOR LESS ROLE
OF THE GOVERNMENT
IN BUSINESS DECISION-MAKING,
SO I THINK THERE'S A BIG DEBATE
GOING ON INTERNALLY HERE.
[MAN TRANSLATING SAKAE]
I BELIEVE IT'S IMPORTANT
FOR THE JAPANESE PEOPLE TO KEEP
THEIR OWN CULTURAL IDENTITY.
BUT WE'RE AN ISLAND
SURROUNDED BY WATER,
SO IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT
THAT OTHER COUNTRIES
UNDERSTAND US,
AND THAT WE UNDERSTAND
OTHER COUNTRIES.
* GO ON NOW, GO
WALK OUT THE DOOR
* WEREN'T YOU THE ONE WHO TRIED
TO BREAK ME WITH GOOD-BYE
* LAY DOWN AND DIE
OH, NO, NOT I
* I WILL SURVIVE
* I KNOW I'LL STAY ALIVE
* 'CAUSE I GOT
ALL MY LIFE TO LIVE
* I WILL SURVIVE
I WILL SURVIVE
CAPTIONS: BROADCAST TEXT
WWW.BROADCASTTEXT.COM